[ValSet-Pref] Added Proto Definitions and spec (#2745)
osmosis-labs/osmosis: x/validator-preference/README.md

# Validator Set Preference 

## Abstract 

Validator-Set preference is a new module which gives users and contracts a 
better UX for staking to a set of validators. For example: a one click button
that stakes to multiple validators. Then the user can set (or realistically a frontend provides) 

> a list of recommended defaults (Ex: governoors, wosmongton, chain/stack contributors etc).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a list of recommended defaults (Ex: governors, wosmongton, chain/stack contributors etc).
```

Currently this can be done on-chain with frontends, but having a preference list stored locally 
eases frontend code burden. 

## Design 

How does this module work? 

> - Allow an user to set a list of {val-addr, weight} in state, called their validator-set preference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Allow a user to set a list of {val-addr, weight} in the state, called their validator-set preference.
```

- Give users a single message to stake {X} tokens, according to their validator set preference distribution.
- Give users a single message to unstake {X} tokens, according to their validator set preference distribution.
- Give users a single message to claim rewards from everyone on their preference list.

> - If a user does not have a validator set preference list set, and has staked do the following; 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If a user does not have a validator set preference list set and has staked, do the following:
```

> - If a user does not have a validator set preference list set, and has staked do the following; 

Reviewer 2: Or perhaps 
```suggestion
- If a user does not have a validator set preference list set and is attempting to stake, do the following:
```

  - Make their preference list default to their current staking distribution.
- If a user has no preference list and no staking, then return error for messages.

## Calculations

Staking Calculation 

- The user provides an amount to stake and our `MsgStakeToValidatorSet` divides the amount based on validator weight distribution.

>   For ex: Stake 100osmo with validator-set {ValA -> 0.5, ValB -> 0.3, ValC -> 0.2}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  For example: Stake 100osmo with validator-set {ValA -> 0.5, ValB -> 0.3, ValC -> 0.2}
```

>   For ex: Stake 100osmo with validator-set {ValA -> 0.5, ValB -> 0.3, ValC -> 0.2}

Reviewer 2: just curious, will this error when the provided weight does not add up to one?

Author: Yup it will error

  our stake logic will attempt to stake (100 * 0.5) 50osmo for ValA , (100 * 0.3) 30osmo from ValB and (100 * 0.2) 20osmo from ValC.

UnStaking Calculation 

> - The user provides an amount to unstake and our `MsgUnStakeFromValidatorSet` divides the amount based on validator weight distribution.

Reviewer: What if I stake with set A, then I change my preferences to different proportions (set B) and try to unstake? Is there some kind of history of preferences to make sure that we don't attempt to unstake more or fewer tokens based on the changed preference list?

Author: hmm thats interesting. Are you recommending something like this approach? 

```
UserA -> {ValA: 0.5, ValB: 0.2, ValC: 0.3}
User A stakes: 100osmo {ValA-> 50osmo, ValB-> 20osmo, ValC -> 30osmo} 
** Store the history of {weight, amount} ** 

UserA modifies the weight -> {ValA: 0.1, ValB: 0.2, ValC: 0.8}
** Internally check if this modification is possible (i.e. check if the user staked >= amount to that validator) **  
** Only allow weight modification if the newAmountToStake < oldAmountStaked which can be calculated by weight*TotalAmount ** 

UserA unstakes 50osmo -> {ValA -> 5osmo, ValB -> 10osmo, ValC -> 40osmo} 
**Result in error because ValC only has 30tokens staked** 
```

Reviewer: On another look, I think I just misinterpreted what is happening here. 

I guess when userA changes their preferences list, the unstaking from the old set and restaking to a new set is going to happen behind the scenes. That way, the problem I originally mentioned wouldn't happen. It might be worth specifying in the doc that changing the preferences list implies that we unstake from the old + restake to a new set.

Author: aah i see. Yea i believe this is a much cleaner approach. I will mention it :))

Author: I'm going to leave this unresolved, so that we can get more feedback from other reviewers

Reviewer 3: So this spec doesn't discuss the case of what is done when a user does some 'direct' undelegation.

So I set valset { A: .5, B: .2, C: .3 }, and suppose I stake 100 to it, to get:

A: 50, B: 20, C: 30

Then I directly undelegate 20 from B. (So I'm at A:50, C:30)

If I try to valset undelegate 80, what should happen. Options that I think are fine:
- valset Undelegate fails
- valset Undelegate Takes {arbitrary distribution across valset validators if theres been direct modification that is unsatisfiable}

Reviewer 3: I find this generally fine, since redelegate to valset will fix this in worst case scenarios

Author: hmm i didn't really think about "direct unstake" and "val-set undelegate" colliding. Should i look into updating "validator-set" state based on the txs from "direct undelegate" and vice versa?

# validator-set Preference 

## Abstract 

Validator-Set preference is a new module which gives users and contracts a 
better UX for staking to a set of validators. For example: a one click button
that delegates to multiple validators. Then the user can set (or realistically a frontend provides) 

> a list of recommended defaults (Ex: governors, wosmongton, chain/stack contributors etc).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
a list of recommended defaults (Ex: active governors, relayers, core stack contributors etc).
```

> Currently this can be done on-chain with frontends, but having a preference list stored locally 
> eases frontend code burden. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Currently this can be done on-chain with frontends, but having a preference list stored on-chain 
lowers front-end code burden and eliminates potential front-end lock in.
```

## Design 

How does this module work? 

- Allow a user to set a list of {val-addr, weight} in the state, called their validator-set preference.
- Allow a user to update a list of {val-addr, weight} in the state, then do the following; 
  - Unstake the existing tokens (run the same unbond logic as cosmos-sdk staking).
  - Update the validator distribution weights.

>   - Stake the tokens based on the new weights.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - Stake the tokens based on the new weights.
  - Redelegate their current delegation to the desired set.
```

- Give users a single message to delegate {X} tokens, according to their validator-set preference distribution.
- Give users a single message to undelegate {X} tokens, according to their validator-set preference distribution.
- Give users a single message to claim rewards from everyone on their preference list.

> - If a user does not have a validator-set preference list set and has is attempting to delegate do the following; 
>   - Make their preference list default to their current staking distribution.
> - If a user has no preference list and no staking, then return error for messages.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- If the delegator has not set a validator-set preference list then the validator set, then it defaults to their current validator set.
- If a user has no preference list and has not staked, then these messages / queries return errors.
```

## Calculations

Staking Calculation 

- The user provides an amount to stake and our `MsgStakeToValidatorSet` divides the amount based on validator weight distribution.
  For example: Stake 100osmo with validator-set {ValA -> 0.5, ValB -> 0.3, ValC -> 0.2}
  our stake logic will attempt to stake (100 * 0.5) 50osmo for ValA , (100 * 0.3) 30osmo from ValB and (100 * 0.2) 20osmo from ValC.

> UnStaking Calculation 

Reviewer 3: Lets update the staking / unstaking terminology to either:
* delegating / undelegating
or
* bonding / unbonding

  - The user will then have 73osmo remaining with unchanged weights {ValA -> 0.5, ValB -> 0.3, ValC -> 0.2},

## Messages

### CreateValidatorSetPreference

Creates a validator-set of `{valAddr, Weight}` given the delegator address.
and preferences. The weights are in decimal format from 0 to 1 and must add up to 1.

```go
    string delegator = 1 [ (gogoproto.moretags) = "yaml:\"delegator\"" ];
    repeated ValidatorPreference preferences = 2 [
      (gogoproto.moretags) = "yaml:\"preferences\"",
      (gogoproto.nullable) = false
    ];
```

**State Modifications:**

- Safety Checks
  - check if the user already has a validator-set created. 
  - check if the validator exist and is valid.
  - check if the validator-set add up to 1.
- Add owner address to the `KVStore`, where a state of validator-set is stored. 

### UpdateValidatorSetPreference

Updates a validator-set of `{valAddr, Weight}` given the delegator address
and existing preferences. The weights calculations follow the same rule as `CreateValidatorSetPreference`.
If a user changes their preferences list, the unstaking logic will run from the old set and 

> restaking to a new set is going to happen behind the scenes.

Reviewer 3: Interesting!

What I'd suggest as the abstraction is we have the following messages:
* SetValidatorSet
* DelegateToValidatorSet
* UndelegateFromValidatorSet
* RedelegateToValidatorSet

So when I do "set", I don't adjust existing delegations. We only adjust existing delegations, when we do redelegate.

Reviewer 3: (we can also implement modularly)

Author: This makes sense. `RedelegateToValidatorSet` will basically have the same features as `UpdateValidatorSetPreference` right? 

I like the option of supporting both set + redelegate function to make it modular. The only thing to check will be if the user already has a val-set. If they do then run  Regelegate logic else run SetValidator logic
